Thank you, friends. Always warm welcome. It's an honor and a joy to get to be here once again
together and reflect on and absorb the meaning of the Dharma into our lives, into our hearts,
into our minds. So, as Ven. Khewpo Rinpoche and all these lineage masters have encouraged
us time and again, there are these three ways that we align ourselves with the living Dharma,
that we become living Dharma. And these three ways are renunciation, bodhicitta, and pure
perception. So renunciation or joyful, like a joyful, kind of gracious gratitude, kind
of an alive, sparkling sense of kind of preciousness of what's happening. So we kind of activate
that kind of direct, kind of relaxed, clear understanding of how precious this moment
is, how special we are, our friends and family, this environment we're in, reflect on the
Dharma, this living lineage that's sustaining the Dharma. We can use it to actually become
enlightened for the benefit of all beings. And then secondly, we extend that for the benefit
of all beings, like we're actually reflecting on this, we go for refuge so we can actually
serve all beings, more skillfully help others feel happy right now and then long term forever.
And the only way to have long lasting happiness is to become free of suffering, the causes
of suffering, this enlightenment. So we're really doing this with kind of this bright
motivation that made this become a like principle, ripe, rich, perfect condition for all beings
to become happy and be free of all suffering and the causes so to be enlightened. And thirdly,
activate this pure perception, this very close warm hearted connection to the Dharma. The
Dharma not as just as some scriptural, textural thing, like a textual on kind of outer phenomena,
but the living Dharma reality, the living reality of our environment, of ourselves and our
environment,
of all the other beings, the relationships between and through all of us. This is actually
living Dharma. And that's naturally kind of a wise, it's naturally inclusive. It's already
naturally functioning just fine. Reality is doing what reality does. And in one way, Vajrayana
points to this with so much precision and detail, skillful means, points to this and
calls it pure perception, this close warm hearted, connected, devoted kind of surrender to reality,
the reality outside, inside and in between. This pure reality are like how our mind is
when wisdom is allowed to do what wisdom does. When compassion is allowed to flow is compassion
will. When we don't block that up, naturally flows wisdom and compassion. It's all pure
perception. We activate that in our experience now. So the topic today, I thought to just reflect
on
and contemplate a little bit was accessing the power of belief, accessing the power of belief.
I think sometimes I kind of hear, kind of get a sense of and in myself feel like what we need
to do is go beyond all these beliefs, dogma, blind faith, just belief, rote, belief, as if all the
beliefs we have are just bad. They're all holding us back, inhibiting us, locking us up. And I
think
in terms of Buddha Dharma, specifically in Vajrayana, this is not true. There's a rare few
accomplished
individuals and Atty. Yoga, Zogchen, Mahasanti practitioners that actually have gone beyond all
conceptual grasping. They don't need concepts or beliefs anymore. They're really beyond all views.
They no longer cling to any views. But up until that point, the ninth Yana or vehicle, every other
vehicle or approach, every path, every Yana includes concepts. It uses concepts to then lessen the
grasping onto those concepts. So in this way, belief isn't bad in and of itself. It's our grasping,
just like we've heard so many times. It's our grasping onto the belief. It's our grasping onto
the view. That's the problem. We don't need to erase reality. We don't need to erase these relative
patterns. How could we ever? That's called nihilism. We're not trying to erase beliefs. We're
trying to
become more flexible and skillful with how we use them. So we can use these beliefs, these views,
these patterns to actually include more reality, more of nature, more of Dharma, more Yanas. That's
why the higher vehicles or Yanas include the lower Yanas and vehicles, but they transcend the
limitations or the grasping onto those restricted patterns of just those kind of smaller or less
inclusive ways of being with reality. They include the valuable contributions like Shravaka Yana,
Bodhisattva Yana, outer Tantras, inner Tantras. Mzogchen includes all of these, but doesn't stay
in any one set of these beliefs. It keeps going beyond them, beyond the grasping onto any one
approach. So it's inclusive. This is kind of the general orientation or directionality of all the
paths, according to Nyingma School, to become more inclusive of reality, but not just including
things randomly, lining up with these patterned systems according to what's helpful. Not just
throwing everything all together in a bucket, but actually being in a living ecology, being in a
living vehicle, being in a living body, being in a living environment and lining up attuning with
that environment, with that world. That's why view or a tawa can be thought of as a world. It's not
just an idea we have and based on reality. A view or a tawa is a world view. We're literally
making worlds moment by moment. Every moment begins with a view. The Buddha was so clear about this
.
Venerable Kengpa Rinpoche has taught this so, so clearly. First, have a very clear view, then stand
and walk on the path. Venerable Kengpa Rinpoche has emphasized this so many times over the years.
Clearly establish a view, then walk on the path. We need to be very precise about the view, about
the
pattern, the world we're in. Otherwise, how will we know what the meditation is? How will we know
what our activity or behavior is? How will we know what the results going to be? Always these
follow together as a complete and like coherent system of view, meditation, conduct, fruition.
Always is taught like this in Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism. So how do we use a view, a belief
,
a world view, a filter? How do we use the whole world that it opens us to? That world we're making
moment by moment. How do we use it so that it encourages and empowers us to have more kind of
ability to bring about happiness of self and other, freedom of self and others? It's not a question
of
erasing views. It's going beyond the grasping onto any one view or one set of views, releasing the
grasping and let the kind of nature, the world naturally do what the world would naturally do.
This is kind of oriented towards pure perception, like I mentioned a little bit earlier. So in
general, there's three kinds of beliefs, three kinds of views. How do we access the power of these?
This is very general. There's negative beliefs, positive beliefs, and then going beyond belief.
Often the Rimbachis talk about this as negative duality, positive duality, non duality, or negative
grasping, positive grasping, non grasping. This is taught by the Buddha. This is said to be the
complete teaching of the Buddha, to give up harm, to do virtue, perform virtue, and tame your mind,
be with your mind, nature of mind. So you look at this from the higher Rhyanas, Mahayana and then
Sutra Mahayana, Tantra Mahayana. This is saying give up negative grasping, perform positive
grasping, recognize non grasping, wisdom. So then simply put, this is the path of the two accum
ulations,
perform merit, accumulate merit, and recognize and be wisdom. These are always said to be the two
essential aspects of any path. The great Jama and Konta Rinpoche really emphasized this. Ground is
relative and absolute truth. Path is two accumulations, merit and wisdom, positive grasping and non
grasping. And the result is the two bodies, formless body and formed body, Rupakaya and Arupakaya.
Rupakaya's Rupakaya emphasizes so much. So here we're looking more at the path. Perform positive
grasping, positive belief, go beyond belief, recognize non grasping wisdom mind. So in this
way we're using positive grasping wherever our mind and heart are. We're using it as a leaping off
point into wisdom. We use positive grasping to recognize non grasping. We use merit as a pattern
system, as a view, a worldview, a world we're in. We use the world, we pay attention to the world,
and we kind of kind of grow it in a flourishing, nutritious way so that we relax and let the world
do what the world does. It's already intelligent. Our mind and heart are already intelligent. They
're
already including, they already embrace, it's already compassion. This is key core Buddha
nature teachings, third turning of the wheel of Dharma. Buddha nature is already there, outside
and inside, in every single mind. We don't have to make it be there. We have to allow it to do what
it does. Allow Buddha nature to shine as it shines. And the more inclusive the belief, the more
inclusive the world, the more the Buddha nature shines on. This means the one way we can talk
about this also is a coherence. The more coherent of you, the more inclusive of you, then the more
it allows Buddha nature to shine through it. So it's kind of a sutra mayana language, the less it's
obstructed by emotional obscuration and cognitive obscuration. Buddha nature is just shining
brightly
because these are being removed. And these views, these beliefs we have, there's not just one big
blanket belief, there's really very tangible beliefs, tangible patterns, really, really,
really subtle patterns. But any way we orient is a belief. Any way we orient at all is a belief of
you,
a patterning system that we're aligning to, rules we're following, roles we're kind of, kind of
sinking into. We don't have to erase these patterns or these roles or these rules. We have to go
with
them in a skillful way, oriented towards what? Greater inclusion, wisdom, more benefit, more
self-other benefit. This is like the general thrust of bodhicitta, the heart, mind of enlightenment
,
of the bodhisattva path. So these three things in one way, these are just some very general points.
This is talking about we can't avoid belief because we always come with a view. What kind of view?
There's negative views, positive views, and views that go beyond views, the nature of a view. There
's
negative grasping, positive grasping, non-grasping. So we need to be real clear in my mind right
now,
my heart right now, what's locking it up? That would be negative. What's opening it up? The Buddha
nature is coming out more, that's positive. And what's allowing it to just be what it is? That's
non-grasping, that's wisdom beyond any view, any conceptual designation, any locking mechanism. No
grasping, just free flow, mindful, open, attentive care and inclusion with intelligence, wisdom and
compassion. So that's kind of where we're orienting here. And what Vajrayana does is it really
skillfully uses positive grasping in order to very actively kind of manifest wisdom. And so here we
have two general approaches here. One way on the more sutra approach or the bodhisattva yana
approach,
this third yana, we're using a view, we're using a belief in order to recognize wisdom. We're
approaching the goal, right? We use merit to relax into wisdom, our Buddha nature. And then from
that
side, once we're in Buddha nature, we use pattern, we use expression for wisdom to naturally
connect
up with and communicate with beings, other beings, and with more parts of ourselves. We include
more
worlds, more views, more patterns, more of relative truth. Absolute truth naturally includes more
of
relative truth. They're not in a big battle. This is not a dual thing anymore. Absolute includes
relative, relative, orient towards absolute. But from the perspective of the goal of more tantramah
ayana,
we're using this grasping, positive grasping to recognize non grasping, going beyond views, locking
into a view. And then from there, we allow the radiance of Buddha nature to naturally shine and
do what it does. And it naturally syncs up with other beings. And it kind of lines up with their
views, their beliefs, their patterns, their system. Why? Because it's trying to help beings. You
have
to like work with a being where they're at. That's why they say the Buddha never forced anything.
The
Buddha just saw the disposition of the beings, the readiness of beings, according to what's
available
on my side, what's available on the other side, where does the alignment happen? Then the Buddha
naturally flowed as Dharma teaching right there. Then everything with the Buddha's body, speech,
and mind was teaching. Because there's a perfect attunement with reality, with Dharma. He was just
pure 100% living Dharma, without any limit. The only limit is on the side of the being he's
communicating with. Because what's that limit? The grasping of the view held by the sentient
being. That's the only thing that limits a Buddha is our grasping, the sentient beings grasping.
Other
than that, Buddha is unrestricted. Why? Because there's no longer one Buddha who's outside of
something else. But it doesn't hold an enlightened being doesn't hold themselves as being apart
from
some other system apart from relative truth, they include all relationality, just boundless,
inexhaustible relationality, worlds upon worlds upon worlds upon worlds. Infinitely small worlds,
big worlds. An enlightened being doesn't see themselves as some one player or one person or
being in it. They're everything. It's just boundless relationality. Omniscience, you see,
perfectly see simultaneously every relative position. And they see the nature of them as
being totally free of any fixation. No grasping, no reification, no exaggeration, no locking
mechanism. Totally release all that so then everything naturally flows. That's what Buddha
nature does. When it's fully awakened is called enlightenment. Full awakening includes all the
views, all the nightmares of sentient beings, all the good dreams of sentient beings, and also sees
their dreams. So this is kind of the general orientation of the path. And so in Vajrayana,
we're like really skillfully trying to use this duality habit or grasping or locking into a view
or a belief. We're trying to skillfully use that to include more worlds, to see more of the lay
ering
of an experience, to see more of the richness of our minds, to include more of it, more of the kind
of like, you know, energy of our own intelligence. That's why we don't throw away things in Vajray
ana
as a general approach. We're not throwing away emotions. We're not throwing out something
negative. We're not emphasizing that something's broken and we're fixing it. The Vajrayana or
tantramahayana approach isn't that. It's to recognize it's already Buddha nature. We're
allowing it. We're relaxing into it. We're trying to let it self-correct. The Buddha nature knows
what it needs to do. Our own wisdom and compassion knows what it needs to do. Oftentimes, even on a
mundane level, we know what we need to do. Eat more greens. Get more regular sleep. Don't eat
so much junk food. Scroll less. Meditate more. Be mindful of these things we know. Deep breath
every
now and then. Get some exercise. Be nice. We know all this stuff. It's not a lot of this path. We
know all these things, but we need to skillfully remind ourselves and really kind of get a more of
an energetic kind of like passion about really wanting to do it. The great Sonam Khazi, he said
the path is simple. We have to know what we need to do, know what we should do, and prefer it.
Knowing what we need to do is virtue. Positive grasping. Preferring is we're no longer against
it. This is like our life becomes an offering for other beings. We become gentle, disciplined,
Sheila. We have Sheila or ethics, a gentleness, so that we like provide like a beautiful, loving
opportunity for others to relax into. We calm our own flames of our negative emotions, our
turbulence.
So when others are around us, "Oh, I don't have anything to fear here. I can just be myself."
People relax. That's a big Mahayana, Paramita practice of discipline.
So that's what we're trying to do. Let the Buddha nature do what it does.
This is positive grasping, positive belief oriented towards non grasping or wisdom,
going beyond belief, beyond the grasping of limited view. And so kind of, yeah, looking here.
Okay. So specifically in Vajrayana, then this just really like blows the hinges off of anything we
previously thought could possibly be. We can kind of very, kind of like abstractly talk about
Vajrayana's orienting towards including more views or more worlds. But in the actual practice of it
,
like in the dudrum tercer nundro, we're really boldly trying to boldly, clearly be with
really out of the box, you know, multi-perspectival fullness. Like there's instantly a refuge tree.
And Guru Rinpoche is instantly there. And all the Dharma teachings are there. All the Bodhisattvas
of the past, present, and future. All the great and noble Arhats. All these dakas and dakinis
everywhere. And the eight Harukas and all the Harukas and Dharma Pala, Dharma protectors.
Just like we're instantly in this world. We're like, in one way, pausing our doubt,
our kind of, you know, flimsy conviction. We're like pausing that. Or in the other way,
we're courageously embracing the vivid richness of our experience of reality.
This could be true. Guru Rinpoche could be here. This whole refuge trees could be here. And I
just been missing it. I just didn't see enough. So in one way, we're just like vigorously,
kind of like courageously with vajra kind of awareness with beautiful kind of like
open, open-hearted, like kind of confident joy. Like this is an enlightened mandala now,
an enlightened world, sacred world.
And on the outset, we use that as a belief.
In visualization or the creation stage practice, Karim, it's called Samaya Sattva. As one example,
we use an imagined belief structure. What's the Buddha? What's the Ratnu? What's the Buddha
holding? What's the Buddha represent? What colors? What ornaments? What implements? What are they
doing? What's the purpose? These are all beliefs, positive beliefs. We're like literally using a
map
of a pure sacred world, a mandala, and we're conceptually kind of like holding it in place.
And then what we're trying to do is recognize that it's already there. That's the jhana safa,
the wisdom being. So we use an imagined kind of map, an imagined world. So we can just actually
courageously see this mandala is already here. It's the very living fabric of reality.
And it's not a fixed frozen view. It's not a fixed frozen pattern of reality.
Guru Rinpoche can appear as Chenrezig and can appear as Amitabha, and it can appear
wrathfully and semi-wrathfully and peacefully and with a consort, without a consort. I mean,
the nature is totally flexible. This emptiness, this is firmly established in middle way manyamaka
teachings. Bodhisattva jhana. Flexible. We're not trying to fixate on one mandala. We're trying
to see as transcendental wisdom rainbow body mandala. It's totally fluid, flexible, empty nature,
empty of what? Grasping. Free flow mandala that has pattern, has direction, has color,
has meaning, has lights go out, lights come in. It's not just some blank space of dharmakaya.
It's filled with the richness of sambogakaya and nirmanakaya, a form of pure pattern.
This is pure relative truth. And this is something that in my experience, I look around a little
bit
at different things happening in the world, a little bit. I mean, now there's infinite things
to look around and myself too. There's already been so many things, but most people don't want
to touch this from what I've seen. Sacred world. They're actual deities around. They're actual
buddhas. They're actual bodhisattvas, not just imagined bodhisattvas, an image of a Buddha.
But actually, this room has buddhas in it. Actually, my body has enlightened beings in it.
There's actual enlightened activity happening here, there, and everywhere all the time.
This is pure relative truth. This is the specific kind of part of the fourth turning that Buddha
emphasized. It's not impure relative truth. Nothing's broken. It's all just mandala.
Pure relative truth, pure body, pure speech.
Pure mind, that's the wisdom. So Vajrayana is so bold. And like in Tibetan Buddhism,
this is essential, nuts and bolts, like very kind of fundamentally essential.
The galactic civilizations of pure relative truth happening everywhere
is a tantra, not just as some technique we do or some process we undergo to transform
ourselves. It's actually a recognition of pure worlds and activities, inhabitants,
container and contained, pure worlds that are already happening now, of enlightened beings
doing enlightened activity as the very fabric of reality. This is tantra in a Buddhist tantra sense
,
not just breathing a lot and all of a sudden I get in some heightened state.
It's recognizing pure relative truth that I can use a technique, a skillful means to
see that more clearly, more fully, more brightly, more easily. But what I'm seeing is something
I'm not creating. It's the way reality is if I only kind of rest and relax enough,
if my Buddha nature comes out enough. They said that this is what all these great masters who
accomplished, they all saw this. Then they could do amazing miraculous things like pulling
terma teachings out of mid-air or rock or jumping into the lake, pulling out candles
that are on fire, all these kind of amazing things.
As Tibetan Buddhists, we cannot sacrifice this part of Tibetan Buddhism, pure relative truth.
It's not just formless. It's not just emptiness. This is not Tibetan Buddhism.
That's established in Bodhisattva Yana, that's established in the second turning,
emptiness of outer and inner, beyond conceptual designation, grasping on the concepts. That's
firmly established by the Buddha in the third turn, third Yana, the third vehicle. Then there's
Yana's four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. They firmly established pure relative truth,
not just pure body, but pure speech and pure mind. That's called pure relative truth, tantra.
There are actual deities, pure body, an actual mantra, pure sound, outside, inside, in between,
all divine mandala, sacred world, not something I'm creating, something that is.
And I use creations, positive grasping, like imagining that I'm a deity or imagining that
Guru Rinpoche is in front of me. I use that positive grasping, positive belief to recognize
Guru Rinpoche is actually already in front of me. Guru Rinpoche is actually in me.
Wow, boldly, so bold. I actually am Guru Rinpoche. Every single being can say that.
And it'd be true, absolute Guru Rinpoche, the nature of one's own mind.
Not just sky, but all the relative pure patterns of how that nature displays. Not as a path to
get to the sky, but as the way the energy arises within the sky-like mind, pure relative truth.
This is wisdom and its vast display. Skillfully, we use the kind of positive grasping, positive
belief, Samaya Saffa, imagination. We use that to recognize wisdom. And then within wisdom,
the more we relax into wisdom, into jhana, into our own kind of pure mind, the more we can do that,
the greater the aperture, the greater the inclusion of the views of the patterns we can include,
more, more, more, more, more relative truth. And then we include two aspects of relative truth,
the subtle, subtle relative truth and the very macro big relative truth.
So that's just like zooming in and out, like in a Google map. We're including the full range of
relative truth. And then how are we including relative truth? We're including the impure part,
the nightmare distorted vision, and the pure part. Pure body, pure speech, all the different wisdom
mandalas of all the infinite varieties as they phase in and out of each other, depending on what's
helpful for sentient beings to wake up. So these two aspects of relative truth, we're including
the full spectrum of relative truth from small to big, from outer to inner, from the whole range
of relationality. And then we're also including a different mode of experiencing relative truth,
impure relative truth, pure relative truth. That's a mode or a way of seeing.
That turns on with Tantramahayana, Yana's four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. So like, for example
,
Buddha already taught there's six realms. He taught that in the outermost teaching, first vehicle.
This is already way more relative truth, this is impure relative truth, and it's way more impure
relative truth that almost any modern, postmodern, whatever you call them, person is willing to
accept.
The Buddha said, this is how it is. There's all kinds of hell beings and hungry ghost beings and
animals and asuras, anti gods and god realms, gods, and so many of them. That's all impure relative
truth, but it's full, much more full richness than what we're willing to accept now to believe in.
In addition, the Buddha said, well, once you get into this kind of more like Buddha nature
starts to function more fully and you use skillful means to awaken more kind of completely,
then all of a sudden you start seeing all these pure things you totally missed before,
that we missed. There's all these Buddhas everywhere, there's all these enlightened
activities happening everywhere, it's actually what's really happening. Everything else is just
this distorted kind of jaundice vision, it's a mistaken perception. All impure relative truth
is not actually natural, it's totally made up, it's utter hallucination. And this is interesting,
because from the Tantra view, then all these other ways of we think are so real, like I'm in a
temple,
my name is Rakpa, my age is this, my gender is this, I just came from here, this is my language,
English, all that, that's all hallucination. There's like a tiny little fraction of the
full range of pattern that exists in the world, infinite worlds. This is just a tiny little speck
of the full story. Tantra says it's a full story, it's inexhaustible. You're a Gurumache, you're
Vajrasapha, you're Tara, you're Vajrayogini, you're all these Buddhas and bodhisattvas, all these
inter-nested mandalas. That's what we're using positive grasping in Tibetan Buddhism to fully
embrace, to allow, to relax into. We use this imagined form to totally include all these worlds,
all these ways of being and knowing, that are the natural as our own natural intelligence.
Logic and beyond logic, science and beyond science, body and beyond body,
all this we're including so much in the Vajrayana view. But it's not just imagination,
we use the positive grasping to recognize wisdom expression for the display of wisdom.
That's Tantra. So we should be really careful with ourselves, definitely me too, as if these
really highest teachings like Dzogchen and Mahamudra and Chud and Shije and all these
really lambda, these amazingly ninth yana are like kind of union of father, mother, Tantra
teachings,
nondual, neuter teachings, whatever you call them, the ninth yana, highest, inner, unexcelled,
inner Tantras or whatever you call. We're not just saying it's emptiness like sky, like be here now
.
That's third yana, Zen. We have to include that, but we also have to include pure relative truth,
pure body, pure speech, that's called Tantra. All these vast worlds or civilizations of deity,
mantra, Dharmakaya, they're all included because reality includes them all. And so we use
imagination
to fully embrace them, the pure and the impure, the whole inexhaustible spectrum of impure,
all kinds of nightmares and good dreams and the inexhaustible spectrum of pure.
And none of it's fixed or frozen. There's no final foundation.
That's why in the end we avoid all the final big arguments on what's really real. There's no really
real. Closer you look, it opens up further. It keeps opening. There's no final bedrock reality.
Vajrasattva in the end isn't ultimately white. It'd be any color. It only depends on what's helpful
.
And then once you locate that game, that world, that system of what's helpful for that mind,
those minds, then Vajrasattva very all of a sudden coheres into a total world,
Amandala, that's very exact, very patterned, doesn't mix anything up. Relative truth is infallible.
And then if that's not helpful anymore, it just phases into another world. And that's helpful then.
It's always ever shifting because that's how actual living ecologies work. They're responsive,
always dynamically moving in relationship to what's helpful. So it's like Buddha natures
of different beings are syncing up with each other. And this makes the practice of Tibetan Buddhism
,
that's what they talk about as blissful or joyful. Because we're not having to create it.
It's already there. We're just having to relax and enjoy it. And I'm not saying I can do that.
I definitely hardly ever can do that. Maybe, maybe for two seconds, like five, whatever,
15 years ago or something, really relax into that. But that's really what Vajrayana is pointing
towards.
To just allow, oh, it's so enjoy, like the nature is here already, I have to create it and relax
into it and let it more fully come out and let it dissolve my fixations, my grasping.
And just really celebrate and enjoy, enjoy the beauty of others, enjoy the beauty of myself
courageously. And so this is not just me talking about things. We can really see this very clearly,
the three main points, like as a takeaway, three main points that always have to be there
in Vajrayana visualization practice or creation stage practice. Rimbiches has taught this many
times. Their Essential Journey of Life and Death, volume one. They taught, teach us very clearly.
Essential Journey of Life and Death, volume one. Indestructible Nature of Body, Speech, and Mind,
that book. These three points, clarity, purity, stability, CPS. I think of it the computer
processing system, but whatever. Sometimes acronyms are helpful to remember. CPS, clarity, purity,
stability. Clarity is this aspect of detail. One camera, Rimbiches says, clarity, we're trying to
really in a vivid detail be with the mandala that we're in, the sadhana, like the dudram tarsar
refuge tree. And it's a living reality all around us. It's not a picture we're looking at. It's the
world, but with a lot of detail, clarity. And the second way that he unpacks clarity is you really
feel like it's there. Guru Rimbiche really is here. So are the dakas and dakinis and arhats and
bodhisattvas and all the dharma teachings, dharma palas and harukas. They're all really here. That
's
clarity. You vividly feel it's really happening. That's an interesting belief there, but you're
not believing it. You really feel it. That's clarity, essential for Vajrayana practice.
The second purity, it's already like this. It's not pretend. These enlightened, the nature of
reality, body, speech, and mind is pure, pure body, pure speech, pure mind, deity, mantra, dharmak
aya.
It is this way. Pure relative truth, this purity. That's the second point. This mandala is really
here. I'm feeling it. And it really is this way. It's just all wisdom display, transcendental
wisdom rainbow body. And the third, stability. Stability is one related to shamatha or kind of
something as if we're holding like a samayasattva or kind of like an approach, like we're holding
or concentrating, we're staying calmly or something, calmly abiding in the mandala. So important.
We
pick a sadhana, we pick a system, we have instruction on it, and we stay in that mandala. We
actually learn to be shaped by that ecology. It opens us up. It opens our Buddha nature up.
And that one way, like as an approach, we're holding ourselves in that mandala.
So we're staying in the mandala. We're like trying to be with Guru Rinpoche in the due
to our refuge tree with the activities of kind of emanating offerings and receiving blessings
and purification. And then then Guru Rinpoche mingles with us perfectly, completely.
So, but there is this orientation towards a jhana saffar, the wisdom being.
And that's part related to this, this stability. The second way of seeing stability is not just
being with in a sustained way, or as if it's just shamatha that's longer, staying calmly longer.
It's being with is actually Vajra pride. I am this way. I am Guru Rinpoche. Guru Rinpoche is here.
This wisdom is here. Love and compassion is the fabric of reality, just unflinchingly,
courageously, naturally relaxing into that stability. So we feel the presence of the mandala
with brightness, clarity. Gradually, the detail of the pattern is kind of clarified. Some days are
clear. Some days are not clear. Whatever purity, transcendental wisdom, rainbow body, it's actually
pure relative truth, everything, not just what's in front of me or in this room, all of reality.
And Vajra pride, be with it confidently. This is true. This is true. It's called pure perception.
And this is such a relief. This is what Vajrayana is pointing towards in one way as surrender.
We actually let ourselves surrender to this living mandala system. It's already here.
It's already functioning. It already knows what to do. We just have to be with it. Surrender,
devotion, feel the close warm hearted connection to the living wisdom mandala.
All these lineage masters, they already recognize this is the way reality is. It's pure,
great equality and great purity in union. They recognize this. They're so joyful. They're so
happy. We're exploring this ourselves using positive grasping or imagination to just actually
relax and rest. Oh, this, I didn't have to create this. This mandala was already here. This
infinite
internested mandalas of worlds of pure relative truth and absolute kind of inexhaustible
flexibility
already here. We just, it knows how to sync up with itself. It knows how to keep including more
patterns, more worlds, more systems, more views. There's no limit. It has no preference game.
Let's just joyfully include more for the benefit of self and other happiness and long lasting
happiness for all beings. So we don't have to like, it's not a job.
It's like, this is mandalas here. Totally pure. I'm a part of it. I'm enlightened. Mind this,
nature is enlightened. And then just enjoy the sadhana practice. And if we can do that for little
bits of time, little bit, little bit, it'll gradually extend. And they say it's just self,
it's auto poetic. So it's self kind of orient itself. It naturally no includes more. And it's
also self fulfilling. It naturally feels content. It's called this great blissfulness in union with
emptiness. It's naturally happy. It's already wisdom. It's already compassion. And then we
just relax and kind of enjoy that. And so there's already wisdom beings that have done that actual
beings that are still here in this room in your body in your awareness. They're not playing games,
they're not locked into any timeframe anymore. They're not locked into any space frame. They
flexibly move however is helpful. But they're actual beings that can do that. They're called
jhana sattvas, wisdom beings like actual Tara, not our imagination of Tara, but actual Tara,
actual Buddha actual Gurmuche. And then so that's like, way out of the box of what most people are
willing to consider. One, the fabric of reality is actually enlightened. Two, there's actually
wisdom beings in this reality we share now that are doing enlightened activity right now.
In this very room, we're in, in every part of our perception. How amazing. It's so wonderfully kind
of vast and big. It's a bold, courageous view. And if we have this view, then things like, you know
,
AI becoming sentient, maybe, or like, definitely, it's already smaller than humans. 150 IQ. Most
humans have 110. They already beat us in the computational game, things like that. It's like,
what's going to happen? The Buddha already taught there's so many other beings like this. There's
so many gods and formless gods and so many way beyond normal human propositional knowledge.
They're talking about time eons of time scales, vast world systems that they are, they can be
in touch with. We have one little piece of one little part of our very human fixated kind of
experience. But already taught, this is so vast. If we more courageously take this vajrayana views,
then we won't kind of like react so with such shock and terror. We won't be so triggered.
We won't be so shut down. When these new things happening, when all the stuff, everything swirling
in ways that are very like, what is this? I say, well, actually relax and be like, oh,
this is one way it can happen too. But what's really happening is pure relative truth. And
then can include this nightmare or this beautiful thing. And so we'll, we'll develop that kind of
courage as well. But that courage of what is Appa and that courage of a great fearless
wisdom being like a, a, these accomplished vajrayana masters have shown us this way,
this courage. And then how will we show up in life? So humbly, so delicately,
such precision will show up what's helpful for others.
We can see that in our great teacher.
Kenshin, Paul, and Cherub, Rinpoche, his Holiness, his Holiness, Duja Rinpoche,
all these so many masters boundless wisdom, such detailed, juicy, just like heart beating,
like saturated, really cozy, just glowing bodhicitta kindness all the time. And they're,
we're following in their footsteps now. And may we always directly connect to these extraordinary
wisdom beings follow in their footsteps, learn to give up the negative grasping,
reveal like the wisdom grasping by using positive grasping or belief, accessing the power of belief
.
So we can really recognize the wisdom outside wisdom inside wisdom in its natural union with
compassion all the time as living wisdom and dala filled with living wisdom beings right now,
this very moment. Thank you friends.
Thank you. Thank you. Great. So now we get to do Dijam Terasarnandro practice.
We'll just have a brief kind of like silent meditation, kind of refresh it all. And then
we'll go to the Dijam Terasarnandro revealed by His Holiness, Duja Rinpoche. I think we'll start,
I think it's page 18 and most versions with the prayer of calling the Lama from afar a mind term
of His Holiness, Duja Rinpoche. Page 18, spontaneous song of the original nature. Great. Thank you.
Thank you.